content/blog/technical/intro-to-indie-web.md, before:

title: In the Beginning was the Website
date: 2019-01-20 20:50:28
modified: 2019-01-20 20:50:28
status: draft

In today's episode of "Desmond Feels Old", I'll be talking about the
IndieWeb, a community of people who are trying to repopularize the personal
website.

I've had some sort of web presence since about 1998 or so, when I made my
first hand-coded HTML pages available online at U of T.  CSS was barely a
thing.  Hell, HTML itself was barely a thing - it was only about 7 years at
the time.

It freaks me out a little bit to think that this was over 20 years ago.

They were *websites* in those days, not *webapps*, and if you weren't trying
to sell something, you had a *personal website*, not a Facebook account.
You wrote your pages, often by hand, and you *uploaded* them to a server.
If you were lucky, your hosting provider let you use CGI.

The subject matter was often estoric - fanpages were common.

## Enter the IndieWeb

Please believe me - I fully realize just how get-off-my-lawn-y I sound as I
write this.  

And don't misunderstand - no one is pining for the days when
you had to write entire websites by hand.

Commit message:

Add more content to indie auth article

content/blog/technical/intro-to-indie-web.md, after:

title: In the Beginning was the Website
date: 2019-01-20 20:50:28
modified: 2019-01-20 20:50:28
status: draft

Last year I discovered the IndieWeb, an online community of people dedicated
to re-popularizing the personal website.

There are many, *many* ways to make me feel old, and this is one of them.
This is partly because I've had some sort of personal web presence since
about 1998 or so, when I made my first hand-coded HTML pages available
online at U of T.  That's more than 20 years ago (it freaks me out to say
that) and I hadn't fully absorbed the idea that the personal website was
something that needed resuscitating.

They were indeed *websites* in those days, not *webapps*, You wrote your
pages, often by hand, and you *uploaded* them to a server.  The subject
matter was often esoteric.  People created *fan pages* about their pet
hobbies.  I myself may or may not have, at some point in the past,
maintained a page about the Wheel of Time fantasy series.

If you were lucky, your hosting provider let you use CGI.  CSS was barely a
thing.  Hell, *HTML* was barely a thing - it was only about 7 years at the
time.

## Enter the IndieWeb

In retrospect, the decline of the personal website is blindingly obvious.
Owning and managing a personal domain, with a personal blog or a collection
of pages, is not something you see very often nowadays.  Most people who
have something to share with the world will do so on Twitter or Facebook.
Those with a greater attention span will use Medium.

Believe me - I fully realize just how get-off-my-lawn-y I sound as I write
this, but it's important to understand what we lost when we started using
social media.

And don't misunderstand - no one is pining for the days when
you had to write entire websites by hand.
