content/index.md, before:

modified: 2015-05-16 01:52:55.879342
title: Home
heading: Desmond's Home on the Web
template: homepage

<img src="{static}/me01.jpg"
     style="float: right; margin-left:1em; margin-bottom: 1em;"
     alt="Me" title="Me"/>
     
You've reached the personal domain of Desmond Rivet, a full-stack software
developer living in Montreal, Canada.  Welcome!

I've maintained some form of personal website since roughly 1998 or so, when
I made my first hand coded HTML pages available online.  There've been a few
over the years, hosted on variously on [U of T][8] servers, [Geocities][7],
[Netfirms][9] and a raft of dedicated home machines.

The current incarnation has been hosted for several years on a server rented
from [kimsufi][6].  I'm going to try and make this one last.

Though I was born in Montreal, and currently reside there, I spent a lot of
my formative years in Toronto.  I have a Bachelor's degree in Engineering
from the Univerity of Toronto's Engineering Science program.

I suppose my main hobby would be programming, but I also enjoy writing,
reading and cooking.  Oh, and mixing drinks.  You can blame Mad Men for
that.

At the moment, this site is home to:

* a [blog][1], where I publish random thoughts on a semi-regular basis
* a [piwigo][2] [photo album][3]
* a [wiki][4], which I use to keep track of longer term pages like recipes
* various [selected pages][5] from my old sites

Please make yourself at home!

[1]: /blog
[2]: https://piwigo.org/
[3]: https://photos.desmondrivet.com
[4]: https://wiki.desmondrivet.com
[5]: /oldsite
[6]: https://www.kimsufi.com/ca/en/
[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yahoo!_GeoCities
[8]: https://www.utoronto.ca/
[9]: https://www.netfirms.ca/

Commit message:

move notes to top level category

content/index.md, after:

modified: 2015-05-16 01:52:55.879342
title: Home
heading: Desmond's Home on the Web
template: homepage

<img src="{static}/me01.jpg"
     style="float: right; margin-left:1em; margin-bottom: 1em;"
     alt="Me" title="Me"/>
     
Hello, and welcome!  You've reached the personal domain of Desmond Rivet.  I
hope you enjoy your stay.

## About Me

I'm a full-stack developer residing in Montreal, Canada.  I'm currently
employed by a [medical imaging company][10] where I do work on their next
generation image viewer.

Aside from programming, I also enjoy writing, reading, cooking and mixing
drinks (you can blame [Mad Men][11] for that last one).

Recently I've discovered the [Indie Web][12] and though I am currently
obsessed with its ideas, it also makes me feel incredibly old to think that
blogs and personal websites are things that need to be repopularized.

## About This Site

This site is home to a fair amount of content and, accordingly, a fair
amount of thought has gone into its [design and layout][14].  Among other
things, this site sports:

* a bunch of [notes][13], i.e. short, titleless posts that other people
  might call "tweets"
* a [blog][1], where I publish longer thoughts on a semi-regular basis
* a [piwigo][2] [photo album][3]
* a [wiki][4], which I use to keep track of longer term pages like recipes
* various [selected pages][5] from my old sites

[1]: /blog
[2]: https://piwigo.org/
[3]: https://photos.desmondrivet.com
[4]: https://wiki.desmondrivet.com
[5]: /oldsite
[10]: https://www.intelerad.com/en/
[11]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mad_Men
[12]: https://indieweb.org/
[13]: /notes
[14]: /design-notes
